[docs] duckdb guide and reference (#14060)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/content/integrations/duckdb/reference.mdx

---
title: "dagster-duckdb integration reference"
description: Store your Dagster assets in DuckDB
---

# dagster-duckdb integration reference

This reference page provides information for working with [`dagster-duckdb`](/\_apidocs/libraries/dagster-duckdb) features that are not covered as part of the [Using Dagster with DuckDB tutorial](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster).

- [Selecting specific columns in a downstream asset](#selecting-specific-columns-in-a-downstream-asset)
- [Storing partitioned assets](#storing-partitioned-assets)
- [Storing tables in multiple schemas](#storing-tables-in-multiple-schemas)
- [Using the DuckDB I/O manager with other I/O managers](#using-the-duckdb-io-manager-with-other-io-managers)

> - [Storing and loading PySpark and Polars DataFrames in DuckDB](#storing-and-loading-pyspark-and-polars-dataframes-in-duckdb)

Reviewer: The heading for this section is `PySpark OR Polars`, whereas this is `AND`

I don't have a preference which one you use, just pointing this out so you can fix the link!

> - [Storing multiple DataFrame types in DuckDB](#TODO)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Storing multiple DataFrame types in DuckDB](#storing-multiple-dataframe-types-in-duckdb)
```

When Dagster materializes `sepal_data` and loads the `iris_dataset` asset using the DuckDB I/O manager, it will only fetch the `sepal_length_cm` and `sepal_width_cm` columns of the `IRIS.IRIS_DATASET` table and pass them to `sepal_data` as a Pandas DataFrame.

---

## Storing partitioned assets

The DuckDB I/O manager supports storing and loading partitioned data. In order to correctly store and load data from the DuckDB table, the DuckDB I/O manager needs to know which column contains the data defining the partition bounds. The DuckDB I/O manager uses this information to construct the correct queries to select or replace the data. In the following sections, we describe how the I/O manager constructs these queries for different types of partitions.

<TabGroup>
<TabItem name="Static partitioned assets">

### Storing static partitioned assets

> In order to store static partitioned assets in DuckDB, you must specify `partition_expr` metadata on the asset to tell the DuckDB I/O manager which column contains the partition data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To store static partitioned assets in DuckDB, specify `partition_expr` metadata on the asset to tell the DuckDB I/O manager which column contains the partition data:
```

Suggesting we remove `In order` and `you must` to make things less wordy. `You must` isn't actually needed here since this is a command and uses 'understood you'.

    ),
    metadata={"partition_expr": "SPECIES"},
)
def iris_dataset_partitioned(context) -> pd.DataFrame:
    species = context.asset_partition_key_for_output()

    full_df = pd.read_csv(
        "https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/iris/iris.data",
        names=[
            "sepal_length_cm",
            "sepal_width_cm",
            "petal_length_cm",
            "petal_width_cm",
            "species",
        ],
    )

    return full_df[full_df["Species"] == species]

@asset
def iris_cleaned(iris_dataset_partitioned: pd.DataFrame):
    return iris_dataset_partitioned.dropna().drop_duplicates()
```

Dagster uses the `partition_expr` metadata to craft the `SELECT` statement when loading the partition in the downstream asset. When loading a static partition (or multiple static partitions), the following statement is used:

```sql
SELECT *
 WHERE [partition_expr] in ([selected partitions])
```

When the `partition_expr` value is injected into this statement, the resulting SQL query must follow DuckDB's SQL syntax. Refer to the [DuckDB documentation](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/query_syntax/select) for more information.

> A partition must be selected when materializing the above assets, as described in [Materializing partitioned assets](/concepts/partitions-schedules-sensors/partitions#materializing-partitioned-assets). In this example, the query used when materializing the `Iris-setosa` partition of the above assets would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A partition must be selected when materializing the above assets, as described in the [Materializing partitioned assets](/concepts/partitions-schedules-sensors/partitions#materializing-partitioned-assets) documentation. In this example, the query used when materializing the `Iris-setosa` partition of the above assets would be:
```

SELECT *
 WHERE [partition_expr] >= [partition_start]
   AND [partition_expr] < [partition_end]
```

When the `partition_expr` value is injected into this statement, the resulting SQL query must follow DuckDB's SQL syntax. Refer to the [DuckDB documentation](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/query_syntax/select) for more information.

A partition must be selected when materializing the above assets, as described in [Materializing partitioned assets](/concepts/partitions-schedules-sensors/partitions#materializing-partitioned-assets). The `[partition_start]` and `[partition_end]` bounds are of the form `YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS`. In this example, the query when materializing the `2023-01-02` partition of the above assets would be:

```sql
SELECT *
 WHERE TO_TIMESTAMP(TIME) >= '2023-01-02 00:00:00'
   AND TO_TIMESTAMP(TIME) < '2023-01-03 00:00:00'
```

In this example, the data in the `TIME` column are integers, so the `partition_expr` metadata includes a SQL statement to convert integers to timestamps. A full list of DuckDB functions can be found [here](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/functions/overview).

</TabItem>
<TabItem name="Multi-partitioned assets">

### Storing multi-partitioned assets

> The SnowflDuckDBake I/O manager can also store data partitioned on multiple dimensions. To do this, you must specify the column for each partition as a dictionary of `partition_expr` metadata:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DuckDB I/O manager can also store data partitioned on multiple dimensions. To do this, specify the column for each partition as a dictionary of `partition_expr` metadata:
```

Suggesting we make this use the understood you to make it more concise

            "species": StaticPartitionDefinition(
                ["Iris-setosa", "Iris-virginica", "Iris-versicolor"]
            ),
        }
    ),
    metadata={"partition_expr": {"date": "TO_TIMESTAMP(TIME)", "species": "SPECIES"}},
)
def iris_dataset_partitioned(context) -> pd.DataFrame:
    partition = partition = context.partition_key.keys_by_dimension
    species = partition["species"]
    date = partition["date"]

    # get_iris_data_for_date fetches all of the iris data for a given date,
    # the returned dataframe contains a column named 'time' with that stores
    # the time of the row as an integer of seconds since epoch
    full_df = get_iris_data_for_date(date)

    return full_df[full_df["species"] == species]

@asset
def iris_cleaned(iris_dataset_partitioned: pd.DataFrame):
    return iris_dataset_partitioned.dropna().drop_duplicates()
```

Dagster uses the `partition_expr` metadata to craft the `SELECT` statement when loading the correct partition in a downstream asset. For multi-partitions, Dagster concatenates the `WHERE` statements described in the above sections to craft the correct `SELECT` statement.

> A partition must be selected when materializing the above assets, as described in [Materializing partitioned assets](/concepts/partitions-schedules-sensors/partitions#materializing-partitioned-assets). For example, when materializing the `2023-01-02|Iris-setosa` partition of the above assets, the following query will be used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A partition must be selected when materializing the above assets, as described in the [Materializing partitioned assets](/concepts/partitions-schedules-sensors/partitions#materializing-partitioned-assets) documentation. For example, when materializing the `2023-01-02|Iris-setosa` partition of the above assets, the following query will be used:
```

```sql
SELECT *
 WHERE SPECIES in ('Iris-setosa')
   AND TO_TIMESTAMP(TIME) >= '2023-01-02 00:00:00'
   AND TO_TIMESTAMP(TIME) < '2023-01-03 00:00:00'
```

> 

Reviewer: Do we need to describe what's happening here with the `TIME` column, like we did in the `Storing time partitioned assets` tab?

</TabItem>
</TabGroup>

---

## Storing tables in multiple schemas

You may want to have different assets stored in different DuckDB schemas. The DuckDB I/O manager allows you to specify the schema in several ways.

If you want all of your assets to be stored in the same schema, you can specify the schema as configuration to the I/O manager, as we did in [Step 1: Configure the DuckDB I/O manager](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster#step-1-configure-the-duckdb-io-manager) of the [Using Dagster with DuckDB tutorial](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster).

> If you want to store assets in different schemas, you can specify the schema as part of the asset's asset key:

Author: yeah so it's `key` for SourceAssets since the `key` needs to be the full asset key. For normal `assets` it's `key_prefix` because the full asset key is `key_prefix`+`asset_name`. does that make sense? not sure i explained that well

> If you want to store assets in different schemas, you can specify the schema as part of the asset's asset key:

Author: i added some additional explanation to say which value in the asset key becomes the prefix. let me know if that makes sense

```python file=/integrations/duckdb/schema.py startafter=start_asset_key endbefore=end_asset_key
import pandas as pd

from dagster import SourceAsset, asset

daffodil_dataset = SourceAsset(key=["daffodil", "daffodil_dataset"])

@asset(key_prefix=["iris"])
def iris_dataset() -> pd.DataFrame:
    return pd.read_csv(
        "https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/iris/iris.data",
        names=[
            "sepal_length_cm",
            "sepal_width_cm",
            "petal_length_cm",
            "petal_width_cm",
            "species",
        ],
    )
```

In this example, the `iris_dataset` asset will be stored in the `IRIS` schema, and the `daffodil_dataset` asset will be found in the `DAFFODIL` schema.

<Note>
  The two options for specifying schema are mutually exclusive. If you provide{" "}
  <code>schema</code> configuration to the I/O manager, you cannot also provide
  it via the asset key and vice versa. If no <code>schema</code> is provided,
  either from configuration or asset keys, the default schema{" "}
  <code>PUBLIC</code> will be used.
</Note>

---

## Using the DuckDB I/O manager with other I/O managers

> You may have assets that you don't want to store in DuckDB. You can provide an I/O manager to each asset using the `io_manager_key` parameter in the `asset` decorator:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may have assets that you don't want to store in DuckDB. You can provide an I/O manager to each asset using the `io_manager_key` parameter in the <PyObject object="asset" decorator /> decorator:
```

```python file=/integrations/duckdb/multiple_io_managers.py startafter=start_example endbefore=end_example
import pandas as pd
from dagster_aws.s3.io_manager import s3_pickle_io_manager
from dagster_duckdb_pandas import DuckDBPandasIOManager

from dagster import Definitions, asset

@asset(io_manager_key="warehouse_io_manager")
def iris_dataset() -> pd.DataFrame:
    return pd.read_csv(
        "https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/iris/iris.data",
        names=[
            "sepal_length_cm",
            "sepal_width_cm",
            "petal_length_cm",
            "petal_width_cm",
            "species",
        ],
    )

@asset(io_manager_key="blob_io_manager")
def iris_plots(iris_dataset):
    # plot_data is a function we've defined somewhere else
    # that plots the data in a DataFrame
    return plot_data(iris_dataset)

defs = Definitions(
    assets=[iris_dataset, iris_plots],
    resources={
        "warehouse_io_manager": DuckDBPandasIOManager(
            database="path/to/my_duckdb_database.duckdb",
            schema="IRIS",
        ),
        "blob_io_manager": s3_pickle_io_manager,
    },
)
```

> In this example, the `iris_dataset` asset uses the I/O manager bound to the key `warehouse_io_manager` and `iris_plots` uses the I/O manager bound to the key `blob_io_manager`. In the <PyObject object="Definitions" /> object, we supply the I/O managers for those keys. When the assets are materialized, the `iris_dataset` will be stored in DuckDB, and `iris_plots` will be saved in Amazon S3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example:

- The `iris_dataset` asset uses the I/O manager bound to the key `warehouse_io_manager` and `iris_plots` uses the I/O manager bound to the key `blob_io_manager`
- In the <PyObject object="Definitions" /> object, we supply the I/O managers for those keys
- When the assets are materialized, the `iris_dataset` will be stored in DuckDB, and `iris_plots` will be saved in Amazon S3
```

Thoughts on formatting this as a list? There are a few things happening in this example and restructuring this as a list could help make it a bit more readable.

---

## Storing and loading PySpark or Polars DataFrames in DuckDB

The DuckDB I/O manager also supports storing and loading PySpark and Polars DataFrames.

<TabGroup>
<TabItem name="PySpark DataFrames">

### Storing and loading PySpark DataFrames in DuckDB

To use the <PyObject module="dagster_duckdb_pyspark" object="DuckDBPySparkIOManager" />, first install the package:

```shell
pip install dagster-duckdb-pyspark
```

> Then you can use the `DuckDBPySparkIOManager` in your `Definitions` as in [Step 1: Configure the DuckDB I/O manager](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster#step-1-configure-the-duckdb-io-manager) of the [Using Dagster with DuckDB tutorial](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then you can use the `DuckDBPySparkIOManager` in your <PyObject object="Definitions" /> as in [Step 1: Configure the DuckDB I/O manager](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster#step-1-configure-the-duckdb-io-manager) of the [Using Dagster with DuckDB tutorial](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster).
```

```python file=/integrations/duckdb/pyspark_configuration.py startafter=start_configuration endbefore=end_configuration
from dagster_duckdb_pyspark import DuckDBPySparkIOManager

from dagster import Definitions

defs = Definitions(
    assets=[iris_dataset],
    resources={
        "io_manager": DuckDBPySparkIOManager(
            database="path/to/my_duckdb_database.duckdb",  # required
            schema="IRIS",  # optional, defaults to PUBLIC
        )
    },
)
```

> The `DuckDBPySparkIOManager` requires that a `SparkSession` be active. You can either create your own `SparkSession` or use the <PyObject module="dagster_spark" object="spark_resource"/>.

Reviewer: Should this be:

> The `DuckDBPySparkIOManager` requires an active `SparkSession`.

Or does it change the meaning?

from pyspark import SparkFiles
from pyspark.sql import (
    DataFrame,
    SparkSession,
)
from pyspark.sql.types import (
    DoubleType,
    StringType,
    StructField,
    StructType,
)

from dagster import Definitions, asset

@asset
def iris_dataset() -> DataFrame:
    spark = SparkSession.builder.getOrCreate()

    schema = StructType(
        [
            StructField("sepal_length_cm", DoubleType()),
            StructField("sepal_width_cm", DoubleType()),
            StructField("petal_length_cm", DoubleType()),
            StructField("petal_width_cm", DoubleType()),
            StructField("species", StringType()),
        ]
    )

    url = "https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/iris/iris.data"
    spark.sparkContext.addFile(url)

    return spark.read.schema(schema).csv("file://" + SparkFiles.get("iris.data"))

defs = Definitions(
    assets=[iris_dataset],
    resources={
        "io_manager": DuckDBPySparkIOManager(
            database="path/to/my_duckdb_database.duckdb",
            schema="IRIS",
        )
    },
)
```

</TabItem>
</TabGroup>

</TabItem>
<TabItem name="Polars DataFrames">

> 
> To use the <PyObject module="dagster_duckdb_polars" object="DuckDBPolarsIOManager" />, first install the package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Storing and loading Polars DataFrames in DuckDB

To use the <PyObject module="dagster_duckdb_polars" object="DuckDBPolarsIOManager" />, first install the package:
```

> 
> To use the <PyObject module="dagster_duckdb_polars" object="DuckDBPolarsIOManager" />, first install the package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Storing and loading Polars DataFrames in DuckDB

To use the <PyObject module="dagster_duckdb_polars" object="DuckDBPolarsIOManager" />, first install the package:
```

```shell
pip install dagster-duckdb-polars
```

> Then you can use the `DuckDBPolarsIOManager` in your `Definitions` as in [Step 1: Configure the DuckDB I/O manager](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster#step-1-configure-the-duckdb-io-manager) of the [Using Dagster with DuckDB tutorial](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then you can use the `DuckDBPolarsIOManager` in your <PyObject object="Definitions" /> as in [Step 1: Configure the DuckDB I/O manager](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster#step-1-configure-the-duckdb-io-manager) of the [Using Dagster with DuckDB tutorial](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster).
```

```python file=/integrations/duckdb/polars_configuration.py startafter=start_configuration endbefore=end_configuration
from dagster_duckdb_polars import DuckDBPolarsIOManager

from dagster import Definitions

defs = Definitions(
    assets=[iris_dataset],
    resources={
        "io_manager": DuckDBPolarsIOManager(
            database="path/to/my_duckdb_database.duckdb",  # required
            schema="IRIS",  # optional, defaults to PUBLIC
        )
    },
)
```

</TabItem>
</TabGroup>

---

## Storing multiple DataFrame types in DuckDB

> If you work with several DataFrame libraries and want a single I/O manager to handle storing and loading these DataFrames in DuckDB, you can write a new I/O manager that handles the DataFrame types. To do this, inherit from the <PyObject module="dagster_duckdb" object="DuckDBIOManager" /> base class and implement the `type_handlers` and `default_load_type` methods. The resulting I/O manager will inherit the configuration fields of the base `DuckDBIOManager`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you work with several DataFrame libraries and want a single I/O manager to handle storing and loading these DataFrames in DuckDB, you can write a new I/O manager that handles the DataFrame types.

To do this, inherit from the <PyObject module="dagster_duckdb" object="DuckDBIOManager" /> base class and implement the `type_handlers` and `default_load_type` methods. The resulting I/O manager will inherit the configuration fields of the base `DuckDBIOManager`.
```

Suggesting we break this into to paragraphs to make it more readable

            database="path/to/my_duckdb_database.duckdb",
            schema="IRIS",
        )
    },
)
```

---

## Executing custom SQL commands with the DuckDB resource

In addition to the DuckDB I/O manager, Dagster also provides a DuckDB [resource](/concepts/resources) for executing custom SQL queries.

```python file=/integrations/duckdb/resource.py startafter=start endbefore=end
import pandas as pd
from dagster_duckdb import DuckDBResource

from dagster import Definitions, asset

# this example executes a query against the IRIS_DATASET table created in Step 2 of the
# Using Dagster with DuckDB tutorial

@asset
def small_petals(duckdb: DuckDBResource) -> pd.DataFrame:
    with duckdb.get_connection() as conn:
        return (
            conn.cursor()
            .execute(
                "SELECT * FROM IRIS_DATASET WHERE 'petal_length_cm' < 1 AND"
                " 'petal_width_cm' < 1"
            )
            .fetch_df()
        )

defs = Definitions(
    assets=[small_petals],
    resources={
        "duckdb": DuckDBResource(
            database="path/to/my_duckdb_database.duckdb",
            schema="IRIS",
        )
    },
)
```

> In this example, we attach the DuckDB resource to the `small_petals` asset. In the body of the asset function, we use the `get_connection` context manager on the resource to get a [duckdb.DuckDBPyConnection](https://duckdb.org/docs/api/python/reference/#duckdb.DuckDBPyConnection). We can use this connection to execute a custom SQL query against the `IRIS_DATASET` table created in [Step 2: Create tables in DuckDB](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster#store-a-dagster-asset-as-a-table-in-duckdb) of the [Using Dagster with DuckDB tutorial](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we attach the DuckDB resource to the `small_petals` asset. In the body of the asset function, we use the `get_connection` context manager on the resource to get a [`duckdb.DuckDBPyConnection`](https://duckdb.org/docs/api/python/reference/#duckdb.DuckDBPyConnection). We can use this connection to execute a custom SQL query against the `IRIS_DATASET` table created in [Step 2: Create tables in DuckDB](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster#store-a-dagster-asset-as-a-table-in-duckdb) of the [Using Dagster with DuckDB tutorial](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster).
```

```sql
SELECT *
 WHERE SPECIES in ('Iris-setosa')
   AND TO_TIMESTAMP(TIME) >= '2023-01-02 00:00:00'
   AND TO_TIMESTAMP(TIME) < '2023-01-03 00:00:00'
```

In this example, the data in the `TIME` column are integers, so the `partition_expr` metadata includes a SQL statement to convert integers to timestamps. A full list of DuckDB functions can be found [here](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/functions/overview).

</TabItem>
</TabGroup>

---

## Storing tables in multiple schemas

You may want to have different assets stored in different DuckDB schemas. The DuckDB I/O manager allows you to specify the schema in several ways.

If you want all of your assets to be stored in the same schema, you can specify the schema as configuration to the I/O manager, as we did in [Step 1: Configure the DuckDB I/O manager](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster#step-1-configure-the-duckdb-io-manager) of the [Using Dagster with DuckDB tutorial](/integrations/duckdb/using-duckdb-with-dagster).

> If you want to store assets in different schemas, you can specify the schema as part of the asset's asset key. The schema will be the second-to-last value in the asset key. For `SourceAsset`s, the full asset key is specified using the `key` parameter. For Software-defined Assets, the full asset key is the `key_prefix` prepended to the asset name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to store assets in different schemas, you can specify the schema as part of the asset's asset key:

- **For `SourceAsset`**, use the `key` parameter. The schema should be the second-to-last value in the parameter. In the following example, this would be `daffodil`.

- **For Software-defined Assets**, use the `key_prefix` parameter. This value will be prepended to the asset name to create the full asset key. In the following example, this would be `iris`.
```

Thoughts? I know it's a bit repetitive with the explanation following the example, but I think it might make things click while reading the code instead of immediately after. Definitely not tied to this tho

Author: i really like that!
